Now that a security team has
successfully contained eradicated and
recovered from an incident,
their job is done, right?
Not quite.
Whether it's a new technology or
a new vulnerability,
there's always more to learn
in the security field.
The perfect time for learning and
improvement happens during the final phase
of the incident response lifecycle,
post-incident activity.
The post-incident activity
phase entails the process of
reviewing an incident to identify areas
for improvement during incident handling.
During this phase of the lifecycle,
different types of documentation get
updated or created.
One of the critical forms of documentation
that gets created is the final report.
The final report is documentation that
provides a comprehensive review of
an incident.
It includes a timeline and details of
all events related to the incident and
recommendations for future prevention.
During an incident, the goal of
the security team is to focus efforts on
response and recovery.
After an incident, security teams work to
minimize the risk of it happening again.
One way to improve processes is to
hold a lessons learned meeting.
A lessons learned meeting includes all
parties involved in the incident and
is generally held within two
weeks after the incident.
During this meeting, the incident is
reviewed to determine what happened,
what actions were taken, and
how well the actions worked.
The final report is also used as the main
reference document during this meeting.
The goal of the discussions in a lessons
learned meeting is to share ideas and
information about the incident and
how to improve future response efforts.
Here are some questions to ask
during a lessons learned meeting:
What happened?
What time did it happen?
Who discovered it?
How did it get contained?
What were the actions taken for recovery?
What could have been done differently?
Incident reviews can reveal human errors
before detection and during response,
whether it's a security analyst missing
a step in a recovery process, or
an employee clicking a link in a phishing
email, resulting in the spread of malware.
Blaming someone for an action they did or
didn't do should be avoided.
Instead security teams can view this as
an opportunity to learn from what happened
and improve.